While comparing two biological sequence a key point it's the alignment between them. To correctly evaluate each possible alignment and understand what is a the best one we need to have a scoring scheme. A basic scoring scheme give a score when a pair of residues alligned match, a negative score when there is a missmatch and another negative score for a gap. The higher is the score between two sequence higher it's their similarity so it's more likely that the two are related. So from this we can try to derive for example hortolog sequence. Anyway low sequence identity doesn't mean that two sequence can't be related. Evaluating each missmatch with the same score it's unfair 
because some substitution had higher impact and can be more or less frequent. To face this problem a more complex scoring scheme that implement a substituion matrix was created. A substitution matrix it's a table in which each pair of AA in alignment it's evaluated with a given score. The score it's computed as the log-odd of the frequencies to have that pair compared to the probability of have the two of them by chance. (see formula on paper).
We can't campute this on two random sequence, but two of them have been computed on set of reliable data, PAM and BLOSUM.
PAM was the first one created by Daydoff. This was done starting from sequence from 71 protein family and in each family sequence had 85% identity at least. From that was built a phylogenetic tree and reconstructed the mutation in it with their frequencies then built a log-odd scoring scheme with a ration beteen that given mutation on any other starting from the initial AA. Considered in both direction.
Log-odd is used so scoring is addable.
The PAM so obtained it's PAM1 and it's used to score 2 sequence with a single unit of evolutionary distance. To score sequence more distantly related PAT it's  multiplied by itself. PAM has a few problem based on fact that they are derived from closly related sequence, most of them from globular protein and with not enough sequence (around 1500) to be general for every alignment. 
So BLOSUM was created. BLOSUM was derived with the same method as PAM but starting from block of aligned ungapped sequence with a maxium given similarity X. X define the type of BLOSUM, BLOSUM50 it's obtained from block of sequence with max 50% of identity. We can use this matrix to score our alignment but since with the presence of gap there are a lot of possible alignment an alghortim call Needlman-Wunsch was developed. It used dynamic programming, this mean that to score an alignment it first score a shorter subalignment. For every subalignment it compute the 3 possible score: the pairing with substitution matrix and the gap in each sequence. Then after it compute all the possible sub-alignment it returns the best possibile global alignment.
